templates/commands/architecture.md, before:

---
description: Create an Architecture Review (AR) documenting technical approach, options analysis, and traceability to PRD requirements.
handoffs:
  - label: Create Security Review
    agent: speckit.security
    prompt: Perform security review for this architecture
    send: true
  - label: Create Tasks
    agent: speckit.tasks
    prompt: Break the architecture into implementation tasks
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/check-prerequisites.sh --json --no-require-plan
  ps: scripts/powershell/check-prerequisites.ps1 -Json -NoRequirePlan
---

## User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for FEATURE_DIR and AVAILABLE_DOCS. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Require PRD**: Check that `prd.md` is present in AVAILABLE_DOCS or exists at `FEATURE_DIR/prd.md`.
   - If missing: ERROR "prd.md not found. Run /speckit.prd first to create the Product Requirements Document."
   - Read `prd.md` and extract:
     - Must Have / Should Have requirements (M-1, M-2, S-1, etc.)
     - Technical Constraints
     - Data Model entities and relationships
     - User Stories with priorities
     - Interface Contract (if present)

3. **Optional context**: If `spec.md` exists in FEATURE_DIR, read it for additional context. If `ar.md` already exists, read it as a starting point.

4. **Load template**: Read `templates/ar-template.md` to understand required sections and structure.

5. **Execute architecture workflow**:

    1. Fill **Linkage** section with references to the PRD (and SEC if it exists)
    2. Fill **Context / Problem Space** — what architectural challenge do the PRD requirements create?
    3. Fill **Driving Requirements** table — map PRD requirement IDs (M-1, S-1, etc.) to architectural implications. Do NOT invent requirements; extract only from the PRD
    4. Fill **Decision Drivers** — prioritized factors influencing the decision, tracing to PRD requirements where applicable
    5. Generate **Options Considered**:
       - **Option 0: Status Quo / Do Nothing** — required unless greenfield
       - **Option 1** and **Option 2** — at minimum, two real alternatives
       - Each option must have a driver-rating table and pros/cons
       - Architecture diagrams for each option
    6. Draft **Selected Option** and **Rationale** — marked `@human-required` for human decision
    7. Fill **Simplest Implementation Comparison** — compare selected option against simplest possible approach. Justify each complexity addition by referencing PRD requirements
    8. Generate **Architecture Diagram** for selected option
    9. Fill **Technical Specification**: Component Overview, Data Flow, Interface Definitions
    10. Fill **Constraints & Boundaries**: distinguish inherited (from PRD) vs. new constraints
    11. Generate **Implementation Guardrails** — DO NOT / MUST rules referencing PRD constraints
    12. Fill **Consequences** (positive/negative), **Risks & Mitigations**
    13. Fill **Implementation Guidance**: suggested order, testing strategy
    14. Fill **Traceability Matrix** — ensure all PRD Must Have requirements are addressed
    15. Return: SUCCESS (AR ready for review)

6. **Write AR**: Save to `FEATURE_DIR/ar.md` using the template structure.

7. **Generate human decision checklist** at end of output:

   ```markdown
   ## Human Decisions Required

   The following decisions need human input:

   - [ ] Summary Decision (@human-required) - Select the architectural approach
   - [ ] Problem Space (@human-required) - Validate the architectural challenge
   - [ ] Decision Drivers (@human-required) - Confirm priority ordering
   - [ ] Selected Option (@human-required) - Choose between presented options
   - [ ] Rationale (@human-required) - Confirm trade-off reasoning
   - [ ] Rollback Plan (@human-required) - Define rollback triggers and authority
   - [ ] All @human-review sections - Review LLM-drafted technical details
   ```

8. **Report**: Output path to generated `ar.md`, summary of options presented, and readiness for next phase (`/speckit.security` or `/speckit.tasks`).

## Key Rules

- Use absolute paths for all file operations
- All component/service names in diagrams MUST match the Component Overview table
- Every Driving Requirement MUST reference a specific PRD requirement ID
- Do NOT invent requirements — extract only from the PRD
- The Simplest Implementation Comparison is REQUIRED to guard against over-engineering
- Option 0 (Status Quo) is REQUIRED unless this is a greenfield project

Commit message:

Add docs-based PRD/AR/SEC discovery and improve artifact loading guidance

templates/commands/architecture.md, after:

---
description: Create an Architecture Review (AR) documenting technical approach, options analysis, and traceability to PRD requirements.
handoffs:
  - label: Create Security Review
    agent: speckit.security
    prompt: Perform security review for this architecture
    send: true
  - label: Create Tasks
    agent: speckit.tasks
    prompt: Break the architecture into implementation tasks
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/check-prerequisites.sh --json --no-require-plan
  ps: scripts/powershell/check-prerequisites.ps1 -Json -NoRequirePlan
---

## User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for FEATURE_DIR and AVAILABLE_DOCS. Also parse optional resolved PRD path `PRD` (absolute) when provided. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Require PRD**: Check that `prd.md` is present in AVAILABLE_DOCS or resolve it via: `PRD` path from script, then `FEATURE_DIR/prd.md`, then `docs/PRD/<feature-prefix>-*.md`.
   - If missing: ERROR "prd.md not found. Run /speckit.prd first to create the Product Requirements Document."
   - Read the resolved PRD document and extract:
     - Must Have / Should Have requirements (M-1, M-2, S-1, etc.)
     - Technical Constraints
     - Data Model entities and relationships
     - User Stories with priorities
     - Interface Contract (if present)

3. **Optional context**: If `spec.md` exists in FEATURE_DIR, read it for additional context. If `ar.md` already exists, read it as a starting point.

4. **Load template**: Read `templates/ar-template.md` to understand required sections and structure.

5. **Execute architecture workflow**:

    1. Fill **Linkage** section with references to the PRD (and SEC if it exists)
    2. Fill **Context / Problem Space** — what architectural challenge do the PRD requirements create?
    3. Fill **Driving Requirements** table — map PRD requirement IDs (M-1, S-1, etc.) to architectural implications. Do NOT invent requirements; extract only from the PRD
    4. Fill **Decision Drivers** — prioritized factors influencing the decision, tracing to PRD requirements where applicable
    5. Generate **Options Considered**:
       - **Option 0: Status Quo / Do Nothing** — required unless greenfield
       - **Option 1** and **Option 2** — at minimum, two real alternatives
       - Each option must have a driver-rating table and pros/cons
       - Architecture diagrams for each option
    6. Draft **Selected Option** and **Rationale** — marked `@human-required` for human decision
    7. Fill **Simplest Implementation Comparison** — compare selected option against simplest possible approach. Justify each complexity addition by referencing PRD requirements
    8. Generate **Architecture Diagram** for selected option
    9. Fill **Technical Specification**: Component Overview, Data Flow, Interface Definitions
    10. Fill **Constraints & Boundaries**: distinguish inherited (from PRD) vs. new constraints
    11. Generate **Implementation Guardrails** — DO NOT / MUST rules referencing PRD constraints
    12. Fill **Consequences** (positive/negative), **Risks & Mitigations**
    13. Fill **Implementation Guidance**: suggested order, testing strategy
    14. Fill **Traceability Matrix** — ensure all PRD Must Have requirements are addressed
    15. Return: SUCCESS (AR ready for review)

6. **Write AR**: Save to `FEATURE_DIR/ar.md` using the template structure.

7. **Generate human decision checklist** at end of output:

   ```markdown
   ## Human Decisions Required

   The following decisions need human input:

   - [ ] Summary Decision (@human-required) - Select the architectural approach
   - [ ] Problem Space (@human-required) - Validate the architectural challenge
   - [ ] Decision Drivers (@human-required) - Confirm priority ordering
   - [ ] Selected Option (@human-required) - Choose between presented options
   - [ ] Rationale (@human-required) - Confirm trade-off reasoning
   - [ ] Rollback Plan (@human-required) - Define rollback triggers and authority
   - [ ] All @human-review sections - Review LLM-drafted technical details
   ```

8. **Report**: Output path to generated `ar.md`, summary of options presented, and readiness for next phase (`/speckit.security` or `/speckit.tasks`).

## Key Rules

- Use absolute paths for all file operations
- All component/service names in diagrams MUST match the Component Overview table
- Every Driving Requirement MUST reference a specific PRD requirement ID
- Do NOT invent requirements — extract only from the PRD
- The Simplest Implementation Comparison is REQUIRED to guard against over-engineering
- Option 0 (Status Quo) is REQUIRED unless this is a greenfield project
