templates/commands/security.md, before:

---
description: Perform a lightweight security review identifying attack surface, data classification, and CIA impact for an existing PRD.
handoffs:
  - label: Create Technical Plan
    agent: speckit.plan
    prompt: Create implementation plan incorporating security requirements
    send: true
  - label: Create Tasks
    agent: speckit.tasks
    prompt: Break the plan into tasks including security requirements
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/check-prerequisites.sh --json --no-require-plan
  ps: scripts/powershell/check-prerequisites.ps1 -Json -NoRequirePlan
---

## User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for FEATURE_DIR and AVAILABLE_DOCS. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Require PRD**: Check that `prd.md` is present in AVAILABLE_DOCS or exists at `FEATURE_DIR/prd.md`.
   - If missing: ERROR "prd.md not found. Run /speckit.prd first to create the Product Requirements Document."
   - Read `prd.md` and extract:
     - Data Model entities and their fields
     - Interface Contract (exposure points)
     - Must Have / Should Have requirements
     - User Stories (to understand user-facing attack surface)
     - Technical Constraints
     - Security Considerations section (if filled)

3. **Optional context**: If `ar.md` exists in FEATURE_DIR, read it for:
   - Component architecture and data flow
   - External dependencies and services
   - Interface definitions
   - Trust boundaries implied by architecture

4. **Load template**: Read `templates/sec-template.md` to understand required sections and structure.

5. **Execute security review workflow**:

    1. Fill **Linkage** section with references to PRD and AR (if exists)
    2. Draft **Feature Security Summary** — one-line summary and initial risk assessment
    3. **Attack Surface Analysis**:
       - Map PRD Interface Contract → Exposure Points table
       - For each endpoint/input: document authentication, authorization, and validation
       - Generate Attack Surface Diagram showing trust boundaries
       - Complete Exposure Checklist
    4. **Data Flow Analysis**:
       - Map PRD Data Model entities → Data Inventory with classifications (Public/Internal/Confidential/Restricted)
       - For EVERY entity in the PRD Data Model, assign a classification
       - Generate Data Flow Diagram showing data movement and classification levels
       - Complete Data Handling Checklist
    5. **Third-Party & Supply Chain**: List new external services and dependencies from PRD/AR
    6. **CIA Impact Assessment**:
       - Confidentiality: What could be disclosed? Map to data classifications
       - Integrity: What could be modified? Map to data entities
       - Availability: What could be disrupted? Map to components
       - Generate CIA Summary table with risk levels
    7. **Trust Boundaries**: Identify where trust changes, generate boundary diagram
    8. **Known Risks & Mitigations**: Identify risks with severity levels
    9. **Security Requirements**:
       - Generate SEC-* requirement IDs (SEC-1, SEC-2, etc.)
       - Map to PRD Acceptance Criteria where applicable
       - Categorize: Authentication & Authorization, Data Protection, Input Validation, Operational Security
       - Each requirement must have a verification method
    10. **Compliance Considerations**: Assess GDPR, CCPA, SOC 2, HIPAA, PCI-DSS applicability
    11. **Traceability**: Complete Security Requirements Traceability table mapping SEC → PRD → AC
    12. Return: SUCCESS (security review ready for human review)

6. **Write SEC**: Save to `FEATURE_DIR/sec.md` using the template structure.

7. **Generate risk-level-based review checklist** at end of output:

   ```markdown
   ## Security Review Actions

   **Overall Risk Level**: [Low/Medium/High/Critical]

   ### Required Actions (based on risk level):

   **All Risk Levels:**
   - [ ] Feature Security Summary (@human-required) - Validate risk assessment
   - [ ] Risk Acceptance (@human-required) - Sign off on accepted risks
   - [ ] Review Sign-off (@human-required) - Final approval

   **Medium+ Risk:**
   - [ ] Exposure Points (@human-review) - Verify authentication/authorization coverage
   - [ ] Data Inventory (@human-review) - Confirm data classifications
   - [ ] CIA Assessment (@human-review) - Validate impact ratings
   - [ ] Trust Boundaries (@human-review) - Confirm boundary placements

   **High+ Risk:**
   - [ ] All security requirements need explicit verification plans
   - [ ] Compliance considerations need legal review
   - [ ] Consider escalating to full threat model

   **Critical Risk:**
   - [ ] STOP - Escalate to security team before proceeding
   - [ ] Full threat model required before implementation
   ```

8. **Report**: Output path to generated `sec.md`, overall risk level, count of security requirements generated, and readiness for next phase (`/speckit.plan` or `/speckit.tasks`).

## Key Rules

- Use absolute paths for all file operations
- Every Data Model entity from the PRD MUST appear in the Data Inventory
- Security requirement IDs (SEC-*) must trace to PRD ACs where applicable
- Exposure Points table must not have contradictory rows (None vs. actual endpoints)
- CIA assessment must provide Low/Medium/High ratings for all three dimensions
- This is a LIGHTWEIGHT review — identify concerns, don't prescribe full solutions
- Flag items needing deeper investigation rather than making assumptions about security posture

Commit message:

Add docs-based PRD/AR/SEC discovery and improve artifact loading guidance

templates/commands/security.md, after:

---
description: Perform a lightweight security review identifying attack surface, data classification, and CIA impact for an existing PRD.
handoffs:
  - label: Create Technical Plan
    agent: speckit.plan
    prompt: Create implementation plan incorporating security requirements
    send: true
  - label: Create Tasks
    agent: speckit.tasks
    prompt: Break the plan into tasks including security requirements
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/check-prerequisites.sh --json --no-require-plan
  ps: scripts/powershell/check-prerequisites.ps1 -Json -NoRequirePlan
---

## User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for FEATURE_DIR and AVAILABLE_DOCS. Also parse optional resolved paths `PRD` and `ARD` (absolute) when provided. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Require PRD**: Check that `prd.md` is present in AVAILABLE_DOCS or resolve it via: `PRD` path from script, then `FEATURE_DIR/prd.md`, then `docs/PRD/<feature-prefix>-*.md`.
   - If missing: ERROR "prd.md not found. Run /speckit.prd first to create the Product Requirements Document."
   - Read the resolved PRD document and extract:
     - Data Model entities and their fields
     - Interface Contract (exposure points)
     - Must Have / Should Have requirements
     - User Stories (to understand user-facing attack surface)
     - Technical Constraints
     - Security Considerations section (if filled)

3. **Optional context**: If AR exists (resolved `ARD` path, or FEATURE_DIR/ar.md, or docs/AR/<feature-prefix>-*.md), read it for:
   - Component architecture and data flow
   - External dependencies and services
   - Interface definitions
   - Trust boundaries implied by architecture

4. **Load template**: Read `templates/sec-template.md` to understand required sections and structure.

5. **Execute security review workflow**:

    1. Fill **Linkage** section with references to PRD and AR (if exists)
    2. Draft **Feature Security Summary** — one-line summary and initial risk assessment
    3. **Attack Surface Analysis**:
       - Map PRD Interface Contract → Exposure Points table
       - For each endpoint/input: document authentication, authorization, and validation
       - Generate Attack Surface Diagram showing trust boundaries
       - Complete Exposure Checklist
    4. **Data Flow Analysis**:
       - Map PRD Data Model entities → Data Inventory with classifications (Public/Internal/Confidential/Restricted)
       - For EVERY entity in the PRD Data Model, assign a classification
       - Generate Data Flow Diagram showing data movement and classification levels
       - Complete Data Handling Checklist
    5. **Third-Party & Supply Chain**: List new external services and dependencies from PRD/AR
    6. **CIA Impact Assessment**:
       - Confidentiality: What could be disclosed? Map to data classifications
       - Integrity: What could be modified? Map to data entities
       - Availability: What could be disrupted? Map to components
       - Generate CIA Summary table with risk levels
    7. **Trust Boundaries**: Identify where trust changes, generate boundary diagram
    8. **Known Risks & Mitigations**: Identify risks with severity levels
    9. **Security Requirements**:
       - Generate SEC-* requirement IDs (SEC-1, SEC-2, etc.)
       - Map to PRD Acceptance Criteria where applicable
       - Categorize: Authentication & Authorization, Data Protection, Input Validation, Operational Security
       - Each requirement must have a verification method
    10. **Compliance Considerations**: Assess GDPR, CCPA, SOC 2, HIPAA, PCI-DSS applicability
    11. **Traceability**: Complete Security Requirements Traceability table mapping SEC → PRD → AC
    12. Return: SUCCESS (security review ready for human review)

6. **Write SEC**: Save to `FEATURE_DIR/sec.md` using the template structure.

7. **Generate risk-level-based review checklist** at end of output:

   ```markdown
   ## Security Review Actions

   **Overall Risk Level**: [Low/Medium/High/Critical]

   ### Required Actions (based on risk level):

   **All Risk Levels:**
   - [ ] Feature Security Summary (@human-required) - Validate risk assessment
   - [ ] Risk Acceptance (@human-required) - Sign off on accepted risks
   - [ ] Review Sign-off (@human-required) - Final approval

   **Medium+ Risk:**
   - [ ] Exposure Points (@human-review) - Verify authentication/authorization coverage
   - [ ] Data Inventory (@human-review) - Confirm data classifications
   - [ ] CIA Assessment (@human-review) - Validate impact ratings
   - [ ] Trust Boundaries (@human-review) - Confirm boundary placements

   **High+ Risk:**
   - [ ] All security requirements need explicit verification plans
   - [ ] Compliance considerations need legal review
   - [ ] Consider escalating to full threat model

   **Critical Risk:**
   - [ ] STOP - Escalate to security team before proceeding
   - [ ] Full threat model required before implementation
   ```

8. **Report**: Output path to generated `sec.md`, overall risk level, count of security requirements generated, and readiness for next phase (`/speckit.plan` or `/speckit.tasks`).

## Key Rules

- Use absolute paths for all file operations
- Every Data Model entity from the PRD MUST appear in the Data Inventory
- Security requirement IDs (SEC-*) must trace to PRD ACs where applicable
- Exposure Points table must not have contradictory rows (None vs. actual endpoints)
- CIA assessment must provide Low/Medium/High ratings for all three dimensions
- This is a LIGHTWEIGHT review — identify concerns, don't prescribe full solutions
- Flag items needing deeper investigation rather than making assumptions about security posture
