templates/commands/tasks.md, before:

---
description: Generate an actionable, dependency-ordered tasks.md for the feature based on available design artifacts.
handoffs: 
  - label: Analyze For Consistency
    agent: speckit.analyze
    prompt: Run a project analysis for consistency
    send: true
  - label: Implement Project
    agent: speckit.implement
    prompt: Start the implementation in phases
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/check-prerequisites.sh --json
  ps: scripts/powershell/check-prerequisites.ps1 -Json
---

## User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse `FEATURE_DIR`, `AVAILABLE_DOCS`, `PRD`, `ARD`, and `SEC` (absolute paths). The script always outputs `PRD`, `ARD`, and `SEC` fields, but the files may not exist yet. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Artifact reuse and token discipline**:
   - If an artifact was already loaded earlier in this conversation and has not changed (same path and newer content not detected), reuse prior extracted context instead of re-reading the full file.
   - Re-read a full artifact only when required (file changed, first access, or missing sections needed for task mapping).
   - Prefer targeted section reads over whole-file reads.
   - Keep status updates concise; do not repeatedly announce re-loading unchanged artifacts.

3. **Discovery source preference**:
   - If Serena is available in the current runtime/session, use Serena project indexing/navigation first for file and symbol discovery.
   - If Serena is unavailable, incomplete, or results need verification, use filesystem search (`rg`) as fallback.
   - Keep discovery scoped to files relevant to this feature to avoid unnecessary context expansion.

4. **Load design documents**:
   - **Required**: plan.md (tech stack, libraries, structure), spec.md (user stories with priorities)
   - **Optional**:
     - PRD: Check if the `PRD` path from the script exists; if not, try `FEATURE_DIR/prd.md`, then check `AVAILABLE_DOCS` for `prd.md`, then try `docs/PRD/<feature-prefix>-*.md`
     - AR: Check if the `ARD` path from the script exists; if not, try `FEATURE_DIR/ar.md`, then check `AVAILABLE_DOCS` for `ar.md`, then try `docs/AR/<feature-prefix>-*.md`
     - SEC: Check if the `SEC` path from the script exists; if not, try `FEATURE_DIR/sec.md`, then check `AVAILABLE_DOCS` for `sec.md`, then try `docs/SEC/<feature-prefix>-*.md`
     - data-model.md (entities), contracts/ (API endpoints), research.md (decisions), quickstart.md (test scenarios)
   - Note: Not all projects have all documents. Generate tasks based on what's available.

5. **Execute task generation workflow**:
   - Load plan.md and extract tech stack, libraries, project structure
   - Load spec.md and extract user stories with their priorities (P1, P2, P3, etc.)
   - If prd.md exists: Use as primary requirements source — extract MoSCoW requirements (M-1, S-1, etc.) and prioritized user stories. Prefer prd.md user stories over spec.md when both exist.
   - If ar.md exists: Extract component architecture, implementation guardrails, and selected option constraints
   - If sec.md exists: Extract security requirements (SEC-*) and generate security-specific tasks (e.g., input validation, auth checks, data encryption)
   - If data-model.md exists: Extract entities and map to user stories
   - If contracts/ exists: Map endpoints to user stories
   - If research.md exists: Extract decisions for setup tasks
   - Generate tasks organized by user story (see Task Generation Rules below)
   - Generate dependency graph showing user story completion order
   - Create parallel execution examples per user story
   - Validate task completeness (each user story has all needed tasks, independently testable)

6. **Generate tasks.md**: Use `templates/tasks-template.md` as structure, fill with:
   - Correct feature name from plan.md
   - Phase 1: Setup tasks (project initialization)
   - Phase 2: Foundational tasks (blocking prerequisites for all user stories)
   - Phase 3+: One phase per user story (in priority order from prd.md or spec.md)
   - Each phase includes: story goal, independent test criteria, tests (if requested), implementation tasks
   - Final Phase: Polish & cross-cutting concerns
   - All tasks must follow the strict checklist format (see Task Generation Rules below)
   - Clear file paths for each task
   - Dependencies section showing story completion order
   - Parallel execution examples per story
   - Implementation strategy section (MVP first, incremental delivery)

7. **Report**: Output path to generated tasks.md and summary:
   - Total task count
   - Task count per user story
   - Parallel opportunities identified
   - Independent test criteria for each story
   - Suggested MVP scope (typically just User Story 1)
   - Format validation: Confirm ALL tasks follow the checklist format (checkbox, ID, labels, file paths)

Context for task generation: {ARGS}

The tasks.md should be immediately executable - each task must be specific enough that an LLM can complete it without additional context.

## Task Generation Rules

**CRITICAL**: Tasks MUST be organized by user story to enable independent implementation and testing.

**Tests are OPTIONAL**: Only generate test tasks if explicitly requested in the feature specification or if user requests TDD approach.

### Checklist Format (REQUIRED)

Every task MUST strictly follow this format:

```text
- [ ] [TaskID] [P?] [Story?] Description with file path
```

**Format Components**:

1. **Checkbox**: ALWAYS start with `- [ ]` (markdown checkbox)
2. **Task ID**: Sequential number (T001, T002, T003...) in execution order
3. **[P] marker**: Include ONLY if task is parallelizable (different files, no dependencies on incomplete tasks)
4. **[Story] label**: REQUIRED for user story phase tasks only
   - Format: [US1], [US2], [US3], etc. (maps to user stories from prd.md or spec.md)
   - Setup phase: NO story label
   - Foundational phase: NO story label  
   - User Story phases: MUST have story label
   - Polish phase: NO story label
5. **Description**: Clear action with exact file path

**Examples**:

- ✅ CORRECT: `- [ ] T001 Create project structure per implementation plan`
- ✅ CORRECT: `- [ ] T005 [P] Implement authentication middleware in src/middleware/auth.py`
- ✅ CORRECT: `- [ ] T012 [P] [US1] Create User model in src/models/user.py`
- ✅ CORRECT: `- [ ] T014 [US1] Implement UserService in src/services/user_service.py`
- ❌ WRONG: `- [ ] Create User model` (missing ID and Story label)
- ❌ WRONG: `T001 [US1] Create model` (missing checkbox)
- ❌ WRONG: `- [ ] [US1] Create User model` (missing Task ID)
- ❌ WRONG: `- [ ] T001 [US1] Create model` (missing file path)

### Task Organization

1. **From User Stories (prd.md or spec.md)** - PRIMARY ORGANIZATION:
   - Each user story (P1, P2, P3...) gets its own phase
   - Map all related components to their story:
     - Models needed for that story
     - Services needed for that story
     - Endpoints/UI needed for that story
     - If tests requested: Tests specific to that story
   - Mark story dependencies (most stories should be independent)

2. **From Contracts**:
   - Map each contract/endpoint → to the user story it serves
   - If tests requested: Each contract → contract test task [P] before implementation in that story's phase

3. **From Data Model**:
   - Map each entity to the user story(ies) that need it
   - If entity serves multiple stories: Put in earliest story or Setup phase
   - Relationships → service layer tasks in appropriate story phase

4. **From Setup/Infrastructure**:
   - Shared infrastructure → Setup phase (Phase 1)
   - Foundational/blocking tasks → Foundational phase (Phase 2)
   - Story-specific setup → within that story's phase

### Phase Structure

- **Phase 1**: Setup (project initialization)
- **Phase 2**: Foundational (blocking prerequisites - MUST complete before user stories)
- **Phase 3+**: User Stories in priority order (P1, P2, P3...)
  - Within each story: Tests (if requested) → Models → Services → Endpoints → Integration
  - Each phase should be a complete, independently testable increment
- **Final Phase**: Polish & Cross-Cutting Concerns

Commit message:

refactor: remove OpenAPI/GraphQL bias from templates (#1652)
Cherry-pick of upstream 12405c0. Kept local PRD/AR/SEC discovery
logic in tasks.md while accepting upstream's interface contracts
terminology change.

templates/commands/tasks.md, after:

---
description: Generate an actionable, dependency-ordered tasks.md for the feature based on available design artifacts.
handoffs: 
  - label: Analyze For Consistency
    agent: speckit.analyze
    prompt: Run a project analysis for consistency
    send: true
  - label: Implement Project
    agent: speckit.implement
    prompt: Start the implementation in phases
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/check-prerequisites.sh --json
  ps: scripts/powershell/check-prerequisites.ps1 -Json
---

## User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse `FEATURE_DIR`, `AVAILABLE_DOCS`, `PRD`, `ARD`, and `SEC` (absolute paths). The script always outputs `PRD`, `ARD`, and `SEC` fields, but the files may not exist yet. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Artifact reuse and token discipline**:
   - If an artifact was already loaded earlier in this conversation and has not changed (same path and newer content not detected), reuse prior extracted context instead of re-reading the full file.
   - Re-read a full artifact only when required (file changed, first access, or missing sections needed for task mapping).
   - Prefer targeted section reads over whole-file reads.
   - Keep status updates concise; do not repeatedly announce re-loading unchanged artifacts.

3. **Discovery source preference**:
   - If Serena is available in the current runtime/session, use Serena project indexing/navigation first for file and symbol discovery.
   - If Serena is unavailable, incomplete, or results need verification, use filesystem search (`rg`) as fallback.
   - Keep discovery scoped to files relevant to this feature to avoid unnecessary context expansion.

4. **Load design documents**:
   - **Required**: plan.md (tech stack, libraries, structure), spec.md (user stories with priorities)
   - **Optional**:
     - PRD: Check if the `PRD` path from the script exists; if not, try `FEATURE_DIR/prd.md`, then check `AVAILABLE_DOCS` for `prd.md`, then try `docs/PRD/<feature-prefix>-*.md`
     - AR: Check if the `ARD` path from the script exists; if not, try `FEATURE_DIR/ar.md`, then check `AVAILABLE_DOCS` for `ar.md`, then try `docs/AR/<feature-prefix>-*.md`
     - SEC: Check if the `SEC` path from the script exists; if not, try `FEATURE_DIR/sec.md`, then check `AVAILABLE_DOCS` for `sec.md`, then try `docs/SEC/<feature-prefix>-*.md`
     - data-model.md (entities), contracts/ (interface contracts), research.md (decisions), quickstart.md (test scenarios)
   - Note: Not all projects have all documents. Generate tasks based on what's available.

5. **Execute task generation workflow**:
   - Load plan.md and extract tech stack, libraries, project structure
   - Load spec.md and extract user stories with their priorities (P1, P2, P3, etc.)
   - If prd.md exists: Use as primary requirements source — extract MoSCoW requirements (M-1, S-1, etc.) and prioritized user stories. Prefer prd.md user stories over spec.md when both exist.
   - If ar.md exists: Extract component architecture, implementation guardrails, and selected option constraints
   - If sec.md exists: Extract security requirements (SEC-*) and generate security-specific tasks (e.g., input validation, auth checks, data encryption)
   - If data-model.md exists: Extract entities and map to user stories
   - If contracts/ exists: Map interface contracts to user stories
   - If research.md exists: Extract decisions for setup tasks
   - Generate tasks organized by user story (see Task Generation Rules below)
   - Generate dependency graph showing user story completion order
   - Create parallel execution examples per user story
   - Validate task completeness (each user story has all needed tasks, independently testable)

6. **Generate tasks.md**: Use `templates/tasks-template.md` as structure, fill with:
   - Correct feature name from plan.md
   - Phase 1: Setup tasks (project initialization)
   - Phase 2: Foundational tasks (blocking prerequisites for all user stories)
   - Phase 3+: One phase per user story (in priority order from prd.md or spec.md)
   - Each phase includes: story goal, independent test criteria, tests (if requested), implementation tasks
   - Final Phase: Polish & cross-cutting concerns
   - All tasks must follow the strict checklist format (see Task Generation Rules below)
   - Clear file paths for each task
   - Dependencies section showing story completion order
   - Parallel execution examples per story
   - Implementation strategy section (MVP first, incremental delivery)

7. **Report**: Output path to generated tasks.md and summary:
   - Total task count
   - Task count per user story
   - Parallel opportunities identified
   - Independent test criteria for each story
   - Suggested MVP scope (typically just User Story 1)
   - Format validation: Confirm ALL tasks follow the checklist format (checkbox, ID, labels, file paths)

Context for task generation: {ARGS}

The tasks.md should be immediately executable - each task must be specific enough that an LLM can complete it without additional context.

## Task Generation Rules

**CRITICAL**: Tasks MUST be organized by user story to enable independent implementation and testing.

**Tests are OPTIONAL**: Only generate test tasks if explicitly requested in the feature specification or if user requests TDD approach.

### Checklist Format (REQUIRED)

Every task MUST strictly follow this format:

```text
- [ ] [TaskID] [P?] [Story?] Description with file path
```

**Format Components**:

1. **Checkbox**: ALWAYS start with `- [ ]` (markdown checkbox)
2. **Task ID**: Sequential number (T001, T002, T003...) in execution order
3. **[P] marker**: Include ONLY if task is parallelizable (different files, no dependencies on incomplete tasks)
4. **[Story] label**: REQUIRED for user story phase tasks only
   - Format: [US1], [US2], [US3], etc. (maps to user stories from prd.md or spec.md)
   - Setup phase: NO story label
   - Foundational phase: NO story label  
   - User Story phases: MUST have story label
   - Polish phase: NO story label
5. **Description**: Clear action with exact file path

**Examples**:

- ✅ CORRECT: `- [ ] T001 Create project structure per implementation plan`
- ✅ CORRECT: `- [ ] T005 [P] Implement authentication middleware in src/middleware/auth.py`
- ✅ CORRECT: `- [ ] T012 [P] [US1] Create User model in src/models/user.py`
- ✅ CORRECT: `- [ ] T014 [US1] Implement UserService in src/services/user_service.py`
- ❌ WRONG: `- [ ] Create User model` (missing ID and Story label)
- ❌ WRONG: `T001 [US1] Create model` (missing checkbox)
- ❌ WRONG: `- [ ] [US1] Create User model` (missing Task ID)
- ❌ WRONG: `- [ ] T001 [US1] Create model` (missing file path)

### Task Organization

1. **From User Stories (prd.md or spec.md)** - PRIMARY ORGANIZATION:
   - Each user story (P1, P2, P3...) gets its own phase
   - Map all related components to their story:
     - Models needed for that story
     - Services needed for that story
     - Interfaces/UI needed for that story
     - If tests requested: Tests specific to that story
   - Mark story dependencies (most stories should be independent)

2. **From Contracts**:
   - Map each interface contract → to the user story it serves
   - If tests requested: Each interface contract → contract test task [P] before implementation in that story's phase

3. **From Data Model**:
   - Map each entity to the user story(ies) that need it
   - If entity serves multiple stories: Put in earliest story or Setup phase
   - Relationships → service layer tasks in appropriate story phase

4. **From Setup/Infrastructure**:
   - Shared infrastructure → Setup phase (Phase 1)
   - Foundational/blocking tasks → Foundational phase (Phase 2)
   - Story-specific setup → within that story's phase

### Phase Structure

- **Phase 1**: Setup (project initialization)
- **Phase 2**: Foundational (blocking prerequisites - MUST complete before user stories)
- **Phase 3+**: User Stories in priority order (P1, P2, P3...)
  - Within each story: Tests (if requested) → Models → Services → Endpoints → Integration
  - Each phase should be a complete, independently testable increment
- **Final Phase**: Polish & Cross-Cutting Concerns
